It is Wednesday, October 9th. We are in the patio of
Bob Cornish at 1214 Orris Street College Station.
And I am interviewing Joseph McGraw today, who
will tell us about the early days of the planning
department at Texas A&M University. So, Joe, have
at it. My earliest recollection of starting
anything related to planning, not necessarily
department, but just thinking about it as a
subject, was in a phone call made to me by Ed Romnick
in 1958.
at Notre Dame, when I was teaching at Notre Dame.
And he asked if I would come down to Texas A&M and
start teaching. And in the course of that
conversation, he mentioned that since Notre Dame
didn't have a planning department then and I was
only teaching fourth-year architecture, that
perhaps this would offer an opportunity to expand
my teaching responsibilities to include
planning. And yet there was no planning program
here, but we could begin to maybe work on that. Ed
was only then a fifth-year teacher. I would teach
the fourth year. He would continue to teach the
fifth year under a fellow by the name of Nicky
Holliman. Nicky Holliman was still dean. He was
head of the department. It was called a division.
It was an architecture division. I see. And so I
said, OK. So Dean Benson, after some discussions
with Dean Benson, formed an interdisciplinary
committee. And that was the title of it. It was made
up of people from civil engineering, sociology,
the division of architecture, several other
people. Do you remember any of the people? Yeah,
Jack Keys was one. K-E-E-S? K-E-E-S-E. Skrabanek
from Sociology was another. I was chairman of the
committee. I can probably find out who the other
ones are, but those come to mind. You had...
Romnick was probably on it, too. You had somebody
from Parks and Recreation? There was no Parks and
Recreation Department then. Uh-huh. Now they
have an entire building. Right. In fact, Parks and
Recreation Department was started about a year or
two after the Urban and Regional Planning Program
started.
I even helped recruit faculty for that
department. Okay, well, then I came down here and
in between 1958 and 1960,
This committee developed a proposal for
planning, which I'll give you a copy of. I've kept a
copy of it. It was formatted by the inimitable Ed
Romnick in orange and red colors. It's his
favorite then and now.
This program in 1958, probably would have
constituted, if adopted in 1958, would have been
one of the first 30 schools of planning in the
United States. There were, I think, up to around 20
maybe schools in the United States. It was
presented to Earl Rutter and
tabled by the Commission on Higher Education. In
Austin. In Austin. That very same proposal, and
then I left for the coast and went to work for . When
it was stable, I figured, It wasn't going to go very
far, and they weren't quite ready for planning
here. In those days, I characterized the friends
of the program called it socialism. The enemies of
the program or the proposal called it communism.
That was sort of the political climate in 1958, 59
in Texas. So it wasn't, you know. It hasn't changed
much, has it? I would not think so. I mean, it's
still regarded, I think, with some suspicion.
That needn't be typed. No, that's right. It's
still regarded with some suspicion. But anyhow,
then that very same proposal was reactivated on
the last legislative day of the Commission on
Higher Education, which has now become the
Coordinating Board for of Texas. And with the
astuteness of which he was quite capable of, Earl
Rudder got that program approved on the last day of
the legislative life of the old Commission on
Higher Education. They didn't change one jot or
tittle in the thing. I wasn't even on board at
school and all of those things that were in the
proposal. I then got another phone call from Ed
Romnick. It seems like it's making full circle.
Called me up at Wilsey Hammond Blair and asked me if
I would come back and initiate and head up a program
of urban planning at Texas A&M. The proposal had
been approved. Do you remember what year that was?
Yeah, that was 1965.
And I said I would, you know. And we negotiated my
pay, my rank. some promises about the program's
autonomy later on, you know. It currently started
out as a division within the architecture school
with Ed Romanek as dean and completely supported
by Earl Ruddick. And Holloman had retired by that
time. Yeah, Holloman had become the associate
dean of the college. No, he had not retired. He had
become the associate dean of the college
specializing in student affairs and things like
that. He was an excellent man for keeping the
records of the alumni and being an alumnus
himself. He was very good at that job. Ed placed him
well when he put him in that job. Ed had returned
from Columbia to become the dean. Ed had returned
from the West Coast to become the dean. head of the
planning program. Wes Harper had come from
Cordial, Rawlett & Scott to be head of the
architecture department. Alan Staso had become
head of a brand new department called
Environmental Design. James Patterson headed up
a research division. And Jim Marsh was the head of
the department of building construction joe um
you and uh wes and ed and maybe others for all i know
uh knew each other before didn't you yeah this was a
gathering of the clans yeah i was wes harper's
roommate in college at oklahoma a m when we both
went through architecture school and ed romnick
was our fourth year professor in architecture he
taught both the wes and And he was a Harvard
graduate. He was instrumental, very
instrumental in me going to Harvard and getting
the master's degree in urban and regional
planning. In fact, it was at his suggestion that I
even took the planning degree. I didn't know
whether he had lack of faith in me as an
architecture student or whether he just saw this
marvelous potential as an urban planner and
suggested I go to Harvard and take that. And he was
very instrumental in me going there and getting a
scholarship and all that kind of stuff. where I met
my mentor and major professor and then head of the
Department of Urban Planning at Harvard,
Reginald Isaacs. When the proposal was renewed
and reestablished and the program approved for
Texas A&M, Reg Isaacs was one of the first guys I
called to come down He did this, by the way, at his
own expense, because the planning program had no
money, nothing. He came down at his own expense,
and as a personal favor to myself, to further the
cause of planning in the Southwest. And he came
down, and they had a visit, and he met with all the
faculty and the students of the college, and gave
it. a good explanation of what urban planning
would do and his hopes for it and how he thought it
would affect the other programs and things like
that in a positive way. And he solicited all their
support. And I thought he was very helpful in
getting that initial support by doing that.
Probably needed someone with his reputation.
Right. That was, let's see, what happened after
that? I'm trying to think what happened after
that. Oh,
a new proposal was developed and put on board, and
the... By the interdisciplinary committee? No,
that interdisciplinary committee wasn't
reactivated with, you know... Oh, it was, it died.
It died, and...
Myself and Romanek and others began to develop the
first curriculum in planning.
It was reviewed by Reg Isaacs. He reviewed it and
made subsequent contributions and things like
that.
It was officially put on the books in about 19...
66, I think. I'm not sure about that.
The next step was, of course, was to get it
accredited.
We first started the steps towards accreditation
at the St. Louis meeting of the AIP. And that must
have been in 1966 or 67. I forget which. I know
Walter Ruther was the keynote speaker of that
thing, and it was there that I met
Bob Williams and Israel Stolman. I often thought,
looking back on it, that it was at that meeting in
that convention hotel that our program was
approved. Because based on just the verbal
outline of the program and the
success we were having with acquiring students
and things like that, they really indicated a lot
of enthusiasm for the program. Later on, Jim
Gardner filled out and did the report on the actual
documents for accreditation. Jim Gardner, when
did he come on board? He came on board...
I came on the 65, 66 year. He came on in the 67, 68
year. Two years, I think. One-five. Two years. I
could be mistaken. It could have been one year, but
I have to look at it. I want this thing
double-spaced so I can, it'll jog my memory and
I'll write some stuff in, okay? Oh, yeah. Okay. And
he prepared the report for accreditation, and it
was accredited immediately after our first class
graduated at the end of the two-year period, which
is, was a record time given that the University of
Texas had on board a planning program that, to my
knowledge, was about 20 years old under Hugo
Leipzig or Pertus.
Hugo or the program were not widely supported by
the administrative levels at the University of
Texas like I was. And I think therein lies the
difference in the programs. why ours was so
rapidly accredited and Hugo's stayed in the
doldrums for all those years, you see. We had
top-down support for this program and enjoyed a
very quick accreditation, I think, as a result.
Our people at the National AIP and at ASPO knew we
were serious about this. And the A&M program was
accredited before the UT program, even though
they had been in business much longer. Oh, yeah. It
seems like the competitive quality of our program
got the administrators and people off the dime at
the University of Texas, and they began to support
both the program and Hugo with more enthusiasm
than they had shown in the past.
Then the next person to be added to the planning
faculty was Chuy Hinojosa, right?
Actually, I hired one of our first students, Mike
Harney. Mike Harney. Right. And he came on board.
And then Jesus Hinojosa. And then Claude Davis, I
think. Not sure about this. And then you. I'm not
sure whether you came before. Was Claude here when
you came? Or after? I got here in the fall of 1969,
but taught in the architecture department for one
year until a space was made on the faculty for me.
There was no position authorized at that time, as I
understood it. OK. Yeah, I guess that was it,
wasn't it? Yeah. I remember I drove you free of
charge back from San Francisco to College
Station. only to benefit by my superb company. I
know. Wonderful. That was it. But that was also a
gathering of the clans, too, because Jim Gardner,
Jesus Hinojosa, myself, and Bob Cornish all
worked together in an outfit called Will Z.
Hammond Blair in the Bay Area of San Francisco. And
this constituted the primary faculty and who were
largely hired, they may not believe this, but they
were largely hired for their strengths and
divergent points of view on the planning process.
The only thing we held in common was that it should
be at least comprehensive. But we soon depart
company after that. And frankly, it was with the
students in mind that diversity was brought on
board. We felt that in my architecture training, I
never had enough diversity. And I wasn't going to
repeat that mistake in the planning program. But
now we've all come to know which point of view is
correct. It is correct. Of course, mine. That's
how that started. And I knew these divergent point
of views, having worked with these gentlemen, and
that was exactly why that was the main thrust in
hiring. In those days, there was no affirmative
action or nothing. You just went out and got the
people that agreed to work with you. And if they
did, they were on board. And the program enjoyed an
awful lot of dynamics and flexibility in that
regard in its beginning. Another thing was that I
don't think we saw the planning program here as
one, another common thing we shared was that it
must be comprehensive and it need not necessarily
specialize in any given area of the planning
process. Those were options that an individual
student could do, but that was not necessarily
going to be the general thrust of the program. It
was not going to be transportation engineering or
hospital planning or anything of the sort. It was
general planning in its broadest meaning and
interdisciplinary in its nature. And
I guess also implicitly and explicitly by some of
the faculty, we really thought we would have more
influence than history proved that we had on the
rest of the programs. We summed up one of the early
graduates, Larry Priesmeier, who was a recent
graduate in the architecture program and was
recruited into the planning program. And in one
conference in the recruitment process where he
was hesitant to join, he said, well, will I have to
give up architecture when I get my master's degree
in planning? And what I said to him then, and I still
believe in now, and I wish we were more effective in
this, was I said, no, Larry, you'll just practice
architecture differently as a result of having a
plan to do it. And I had high hopes that our program
would do that. It would influence the programs in
engineering and architecture and landscape
architecture to cope with the broader social,
political, and economic factors that work in
their work and make them more aware of the
implications toward design. I'm not so sure a
program was all that successful in that regard. It
was a goal that was never really attained in my
book. The planning faculty has attempted to work
with the environmental design department, as
you're painfully aware, particularly with the
undergraduate programs, but also with other
departments for graduate courses. in achieving
this and it's been an uphill struggle for various
reasons i think most of which have to do with the
politics of the college yeah and i also laid at the
doorstep of having graduated from harvard who
ostensibly was in the same boat of
interdisciplinary sharing and working with one
another a la gropius methods and techniques It
wasn't a practice anymore there, frankly, at the
wellspring of all this thing that has been at Texas
A&M. And I really think that the behavior that we
expect out of our students in this
interdisciplinary activity isn't modeled by the
faculty. The faculty won't act
interdisciplinary. So how can we expect students
to see the benefit of that if the faculties won't
even do it? Unilateral efforts have been made.
Jose and I worked together for Henry Cisneros, the
mayor of San Antonio, one of our graduates in
planning, you see. Now on the Board of Regents. Now
on the Board of Regents of Texas A&M. He and I,
having separate classes, his in planning and mine
in fourth-year design and environmental design,
unilaterally worked out a common block of time
where our students could work together. When that
contract was renewed for the second semester,
administrative blocks were thrown in the way of us
duplicating that effort.
When did that happen? Well, that happened last
year. Yeah. And so there doesn't seem to be a
predisposition to interdisciplinary... But
that wasn't done by the planning department. Oh,
no, no, no. The planning department was not at
fault here. It was my own department head who is no
longer a department head. He could not see his way
clear to schedule my hours in such a way that they
would match Chewy's. And so... Our students
didn't participate in that rather successful
project that Chewy did for the San Antonio area.
But this is the thing. See, this is the thing. It's
always kind of held back. The often used excuse
that somehow the monies can't be allocated
administratively to professors having joint
appointments and that sort of thing is also just, I
think, shibboleths and nonsense.
There isn't the commitment to our rhetoric here.
Makes a nice story, but really, the commitment's
lacking. The will to work interdisciplinary
isn't here, either, among a good many of the
faculty. They want to do their own thing. Of
course, if this continues for any length of time,
it leads to a general malaise.
Yeah, well, it'll lead to the individual there
will be other programs throughout the United
States that really take advantage of the strength
that's to be gained from interdisciplinary
behavior and interdisciplinary work. And we'll
wonder why our programs are not as attractive as
they used to be. Well, for example, there are joint
degree programs that have blossomed in a few of the
more heads-up institutions. You mentioned
Harvard, and Harvard has a joint degree program
with law and planning, and so does Berkeley.
Right, right. And I went to a joint program. I did. I
took all my economics at MIT. And they had a working
relationship with a school down the road a piece.
And you took whatever courses you wanted over at
MIT. And then they, in turn, granted you the degree
from one of the two schools, whichever you were
resident in.
Yeah, so I was used to the interdisciplinary
thing. I was used to the thing. I come to it very
naturally, and I thought it was natural for people
to do this. The complexity of today's world almost
demands that you have these kinds of approaches.
But not yet, and not here.
Yeah, I think... You know, in those time-honored
questions they ask you when you're on your 100th
birthday, would you do it all differently? And my
answer to that is, no, I wouldn't do it any
differently. All I wanted to ever do, you know, and
what I did was make a difference. You know, the old
time-honored Greek notion about that Athens was
better for you having lived there. And I feel that
with regard to our faculty and this program, that
the state of Texas in planning and this university
has been a little bit better for us having had this
program here. And I have absolutely no regrets,
implied or otherwise, about the serious and
meaningful contributions this program has made
as it's evolved over the years. And none of its
graduates should, in my estimation, have any
regrets regarding what they got here and what
they've since done since they've left here. It has
produced some stellar people doing very
effective jobs. And we can all be proud of that.